I have, I've just got a f Sorry, I'm a bit, uh,
I'm using an iPad today because it's easier,
but it's not, you know,
so hold on, if
that makes sense. There we go.
There you go. Nice to see you, Sam. Yeah, very good.
Nice to see you too. Thank me.
Um, and welcome, RAF, very good to see you.
Thank you very much. Coming. Um, and with you,
Oh, sorry, we've got Bridget Wilson.
Bridget Wilson is the, uh, chief Security Officer. Oh.
Moment. So, uh, should we have a lot of, uh, details
that I can share with the committee
if necessary? Mr. Chair,
Thank you very much. And
then just looking ahead, is Dr. Justin Barry Walsh here?
Right here. Do you want to No, that's fine.
You're welcome to say that. Yeah, let's do this.
We just, uh, we've found in this committee that often
with these, um, we're better to, as much
as possible, try and have a conversation.
Mm-hmm. So give each of the submitters the opportunity
to present their own material, but then try
and leave some space at the end
where you can actually speak with each other.
It's just one of the
characteristics of this particular committee.
Um, so with that regard, Sam, I'll hand over to you.
Uh, you have up to 10 minutes.
If you, if you so want,
you can take your submission as read.
Yes. So, yeah, leave as much time
as you possible if you can for, for questions.
Yeah. So I came at this because I worked in parliament.
I worked in the beehive for four years.
I kept coming across this.
I have a number of friends who are women who will not stand
for office because of the hate
and vitriol they will receive.
Mm-hmm. I also know some very brave women.
Look, if I was a woman, I wouldn't stand simple as that.
It just isn't worth it.
Um, the mayor
of Christchurch has actually suffered some quite bad, um,
attacks by which were settled in court.
Um, and I just feel there's something wrong,
and it would be very nice for us to actually try
and understand it, to see if we can do something about it.
I think my experience of women in politics has been,
they're often the ones who are the voice of reason,
because I'm all tied up in my ego and things.
Now at the same time, you know,
women aren't necessarily the best.
It depends, but I think we are actually cutting ourselves
off badly if we remove a large proportion
of our population from actually wanting to, to hold office.
Mm-hmm. Um, the perspectives that women bring are different,
you know, I think it's important we hear that.
And I suspect my, my picking up is that I have two
or three very good friends
who would've been very good representatives in some form,
but won't stand either local body or at national level.
Um, it appears
to me we've got ourselves locked into certain things which
we don't think we can change.
And I'm thinking here about, um,
it's just not worth standing.
We can't shut up the haters. We can't do that.
And I think there's got to be more than that.
I mean, it seems to me that we, we could actually start
to sort of push up the people who are standing, the one
who are standing, and any group,
and just actually support them in some way
by saying this will actually provide
these views to the community.
I think there should be a proactive, something
around that mm-hmm.
Around just actually explaining why it's so important.
Mm-hmm. Um, as a white male in my fifties, it's all,
you know, I totally get, I've had a lot of things happen
for me, which are really good.
I've stood for office and I've been, um,
abused quite a bit too.
So, but women, I saw some of the stuff that went
to Sandra Lee, uh, to Lala Hare
and to the various ministers in the Alliance government.
And some of it was disgusting. Absolutely disgusting.
I don't know how people get up in the
mornings and they can write that s**t.
You know, it's that sort of thing. Yeah. Yeah.
So it occurred to me a review
or an inquiry into what we can do to actually make it safer
to get more candidates.
Instead, I think it would actually
spill out more than just women.
I think it would spill out further than that.
It might make the way clearer for everybody
of different communities to stand for election.
Um, and I think there might be some things we can find out.
There's some very good statistics out there about the sort
of people who've been, um, creating the abuse.
I remember seeing a spreadsheet of the ones
that were coming into the Alliance offices.
These are the, these are our regular customers.
So we do have lists of people and lists of things.
We just need to find a way, I think, to try
and neutralize that nasty pressure.
I mean, that's pretty much my, my only argument.
It seems to me, if we're gonna be having
inquiries, this would be a good one.
Because frankly, if we're not being represented at the
highest level and at local level
by good candidates, we are suffering.
Mm-hmm. And I think, I think O New Zealand
deserves better than that.
Um, yeah, that's pretty much all I have to say,
unless we wanna deal with anything more specific.
I talked a bit about some of the things I had seen, some
of the research I've seen, but I don't wanna
waste your time too much.
But that's really my, that was my heart.
That was my reason for launching this.
The petition I did, I just tried
to persuade a friend of mine to Stan.
She wouldn't mm-hmm.
And I thought, it's just not good enough.
So that was where it came from. Mm-hmm.
I would just like to see an inquiry into why this is
happening, why we allow it to happen,
and what can we done to support women in politics
and other groups in politics as well, to actually do
what we want them to do, which to represent us.
Thank you. That's really all I've got to say.
Um, first of all, thank you very much, Sam,
for bringing this petition.
Um, it's, yeah, I, well, when I say long overdue, I'm,
I'm first term e mp.
Um, but certainly it's, it's, yeah.
What, what you are describing is something that, uh, I mean,
I had, I'd seen, uh, yeah.
Seen from the sidelines.
Um, but yeah, agree, um, wholeheartedly, um,
with your analysis and, and your call for it.
And interestingly too, the, the timing
of this given last week's, um, workshop with ref, so,
um, hosted by the speaker.
So, yeah, no, thank you very much.
Can I just, um, I'd love to hear you just speak a little bit
more about, and 4.2 in your submission.
I was interested, um, in your observations,
and I think, I think you're onto something,
when you made the point, you said that you suggested toxic
masculine culture in New Zealand.
Um Yes. Feeding into you just, um, uh,
offer a couple more comments on that.
Yes. It's basically
because I think a lot of people, I mean,
I live in a rural area now,
and they're actually very good here about things like that.
But you do get, certainly in Wellington, the,
the abuse I saw was basically targeted women
because they were women, not
because they were, had different views.
It was about that as, as we used to say in sports,
playing the man, but not quite the opposite,
really playing the woman.
And I just think that's part of the problem.
And it seems to be we've given people a pass to do that.
I dunno where it comes from, whether it's rugby,
it's schools or whatever.
I suspect it's something about schools and,
and those sorts of things in terms of encouraging women
for being seen as people who can lead
and can provide information for others.
I think one of the things I saw,
I remember one particular email to Sandra Lee,
which I think security were investigating,
and it was just disgusting.
It was just awful. You know, it was just about,
it was just the whole, yeah.
Mm-hmm. And I, I just think there's something in there
that we need to start looking at.
Um, I think it's gotten out of hand in some other countries.
I think we still have a, we are still people
who believe in helping each other at base.
We still believe in a strong community.
I think we've got, we could actually do something,
I think a an inquiry or investigation
or discussion until it would be really helpful.
Hmm. Um, it's got to be owned by all people, so
that would mean bringing in all the other
groups to sort of join you.
But there are groups that support this. Yeah.
Is that, is that enough detail? That's great.
Thanks then. Yeah. Other questions? Sandy?
I've got more of just a comment actually, Sam,
and also say thank you very much.
As a woman MP who does abused, particularly online,
I do suffer quite a bit of online, um, abuse.
Yes. I become desensitized to it as well.
And I think, uh, reading this petition, reading, uh,
your petition when you were giving this evidence, I thought,
you know, it is not okay
to become desensitized to it as well.
And so I was really appreciative of you bringing this
before us, because it is a big issue. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. I dunno how some people sleep at night. Mm-hmm.
You know, it's, that's my sort of basic reaction.
I was brought up by an Anglican vicar, so I'm, you know,
I'm from the sort of, did you say you're a My
father was an Ang vicar.
Oh, right, yeah. Yeah. So I'm used to helping people.
I'm used to being in community groups and doing that stuff,
and I just, I just think it's
so needless and awful and horrible.
I mean, I mean, some, I mean, some of the women
that I worked with in politics were actually very, very,
very sharp people who have been pushed out.
So yeah. Thanks. I don't, yeah. Sorry. Hey
Guys, I was gonna say, Paul, did
you have anything you wanna say or,
Um, Sam, just, just to say thanks for, um,
bringing this up, uh, I just wanted also to make,
to take the opportunity to, uh,
tell you a lit, a short story.
Mm-hmm. I've had, um,
my car vandalized many times.
Um, and I've had someone walk up to me in the car,
um, you know, saying all sorts of things.
Um, yeah. Come up to my house saying all sorts of things.
Um, but I just keep going and,
and I haven't really made a report of any sort.
And I see from the submissions of the service that
that is an issue, not reporting, but we see that only now.
And, but I think for a lot of men, probably like myself,
um, this, the, the work is so, the schedule is so tight
that we just, we don't really pause. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Thank you, Sam. Thank you.
And I thank you. The one thing I would say is there,
it doesn't, isn't a proper register that I've seen.
We had one in the Alliance when I was
working in those offices.
I dunno if it's actually being properly collated.
I think, um, diplomatic Protection Squad had a list
of some sort, but that was only the
ones that were escalated.
I don't even think we know the extent of the problem.
And Polo, I'm so sorry.
Your car's been vandalized,
but it's just, that shouldn't be allowed either.
Shouldn't be happening. No, we're not that sort
of country. We shouldn't be that sort,
But yeah. Well said.
Well said. Thank you. Hey, thank you, Sam. Right,
Ref.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, um, I read Sam's petition, uh,
very carefully, and I absolutely
and wholeheartedly believe with
what he's written in that submission.
Um, I think it is two parts to it.
The first one is, is, is, is the need to do an inquiry.
And I think that's, uh, is, it will be a huge piece of work
because a lot of the things that come online,
we actually don't know where they come from.
They are, they are trolls.
Um, there are people that just make it their life
to just write things.
And they are sometimes, uh, faceless, um,
faceless people that you don't know who they are.
Mm-hmm. From our part, the important thing is what, uh,
both, uh, Paolo
and the Honorable Janssen, he were saying it's a matter
of not being desensitized by it.
And one of the problems for the service
is the lack of reporting.
Um, and I'm always happy, we're always happy to work
with the parties
and with the members if there's a much easier way, uh,
for this to be reported.
But it should never be allowed. It should never be accepted.
Um, and if we have, uh, the ability
to look at the size of the problem,
which we know is really big, we just can't show you evidence
of how big it is.
Um, it will make it much easier for us to think of, uh,
different solutions to, to this problem.
But I mentioned last week in the, in the panel
that if this happened in any
workplace, it wouldn't be allowed.
People will be in very big trouble.
And, and I think nobody will stand for it.
So I don't think that members should stand for it either.
Um, so we do need to work closely.
Another comment I've made, made to parties is
that it is really important that members,
I know members are busy, time poor as you were saying,
but it is important that members familiarize themselves
with the different tools they have at their disposal to, um,
make sure that they are protected.
And if, if sometimes, uh, for systems fail,
and if sometimes a member doesn't get contacted
for a reason, do ask someone, uh, whether it is, uh, uh, uh,
uh, another colleague,
whether it is your relationship manager,
because those are things are easy to, uh, fix.
And, and systems are easy to fix.
The thing that we can't fix is someone getting hurt.
Um, and at the end of the day, they may get hurt
and someone will say, well, it was
because the system failed, but by then it's too late
because the person's already heard.
Um, we are working really hard on finding
solutions to this problem.
We've been exploring, uh, tools, uh, that can be used
for several, uh, purposes.
One could be filtering out, um, from members, um,
work accounts of, uh, social media.
Uh, it could be things from filtering out, um, abusive
language so that they don't have to see it down to
using a tool that would capture those comments
and then flag them in a different way for us
to take, uh, more action.
So those are the sort of things we are exploring.
We are also exploring, uh,
the different tools available in legislation
to see if there's anything that, uh, uh,
could be used in the future
or could be used much better to make sure that, um,
that we can take a more proactive
approach on behalf of members.
So those are the types of
discussions we are having at the moment.
Very encouraging. Thank you. Yeah.
There's never been an inquiry this time before, has there?
No, no. This has been quite, uh, it's not new. Yeah.
And it's not a new problem.
It's not exclusive to New Zealand.
It's been happening everywhere. Yes.
Uh, but it's very hard to determine.
So Sam's, um, obviously his specific, uh, request is
for an inquiry into threats and violence against women mps
and local authority reps given bolos, um, experience.
Um, and I think, you know, both, um, Duncan, uh, we,
and I acknowledged this on the panel.
Yeah. Um, which is again, why I asked Sam the question
that I did like this is, this is, this is something that's,
um, not entirely unique, but,
but pretty close to it to women and, uh,
and ethnic communities.
Correct. Would, would you recommend that the, that,
that the inquiry goes more broadly into, um,
into essentially MPS as a whole, recognizing from the outset
that it's, it's going to be largely weighted
to, to those two groups?
Those are the two groups we know, uh, are the, the ones
that are most affected by it.
Yeah. Um, so I guess that will be a really good start. Yeah.
Because that's the accounts we hear from members, um, uh,
female members here and across the world,
and, uh, members with from ethnic minorities.
Yeah. Uh, those are the ones
that get targeted the most. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Appreciative.
You have anything you'd want to add?
Um, I think I just echo risk comments.
It's the information, the connection with members
to get information, timely information to enable us
to act when we need to.
And not after the fact. Because a lot of the time,
the answers that we're getting is, you know, two weeks
after it's happened, which makes it harder to kind
of backtrack and piece together evidence, um,
and support is, you need support as these things occur.
Yeah. Um, I do, I agree with wrap
that focusing on those two areas should be the priority
and then by, you know, a connection
that will flow into the wider members
or getting approved support.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's really helpful. Thank you.
Yeah, I was thinking, gosh, the, um, even reflecting
after that panel, you know, I think, I mean,
when I get attacked, I get, I attacked from my dress sense.
Yeah. Seriously. Like, yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Oh, so I'm like, you, Sam, I'm,
I'm a white male in my fifties, so
Yeah. I get
that. Plus, right? Yeah.
We had one, one of our women mps had
to actually take a week off at one point.
I can't remember the nature of the abuse,
but she just had to take a week off.
That was Lila. But I don't, you know, I'm not gonna speak
for her or what happened there.
Yeah. But I do, can I just say I totally think it should be
about, um, different ethnicities as well.
Yeah. But I started with women
because I just had that experience
and I thought maybe this might cross the line.
Mm-hmm. If you see what I mean.
Whereas maybe, you know, it seems to me it might be a way
of getting a wedge to the issue if we got there.
Yeah. That's wise. Thanks Sam.
Hey, I wonder if, um, would you like to come and join?
Yeah, definitely. And again, same.
Take your petition as read. Welcome. Yes.
Um, and yeah, speak to your petition
and then we can get into a round table discussion.
We've got got 10 minutes. Alright.
Look. Yeah. Okay. So the things I,
I would emphasize firstly is it very clearly is a problem.
We know that, um, we have research to back that up.
And of course I was at
your panel discussion last week as well.
It was, and that's another thing I'd say, I appreciate
that Parliament recognizes that as problem.
I know from briefing the speaker,
he's concerned about the area
and I find it very encouraging to see both Ray
and Bridget here as well.
So yeah, I would acknowledge that aspect as well.
Uh, the other things I would just state is
that the harm is real.
Um, and it is not confined to physical violence.
We always worry about that.
But I've learned in my work
with the Fixated Threat Assessment Center,
that we actually need to think a little bit wider than
that in terms of harm.
Physical violence is a rare event, uh,
but psychological distress changes in behavior, uh,
and this, uh, effect on, uh,
engagement with the community, uh,
is well described in the research.
We know from our conversations with those affected
that it does impact.
So it's broader than that.
Um, the only other two things I'd highlight is,
we know from using the same study design first
and Westminster in 2009,
and then, uh, through to parliament here via Norway
and Queensland, that there's been a marked rise in
harassment via social media, which is utterly no surprise,
it's a recent phenomenon.
We're still getting to understand that.
And I'd just like to, again, endorse,
I was a little bit concerned to hear
that an MP might have their car vandalized
to be approached in public Yeah.
And not be reported.
Um, our, our services rely on reporting.
It's really important, we've learned from ftac
that it's really important for us to try
and get in front of people as often as possible to talk
as much as possible about what we do,
what our particular niche is.
Um, and so that's an important part.
And when every time we do that, we do see a spike in, uh,
reporting afterwards. I'll leave it there.
Thank you. Questions. Alright.
And so, can I just also acknowledge, um,
so KA was permanent member of this committee, um, had to,
uh, give a speech in.
So just catching you up. Um, KA you can see we've,
so we've heard from Sam, um,
and from from Raffe and from Richard.
And, uh, and, um, so we've now, um, just hearing, um,
the final, um, and then, so feel free
to jump in there, um, yeah.
At that, at that point. And also feel free
to go backwards in the conversation if there are
other questions that you want to raise. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Much appreciated. I've got a question.
Yeah, of course. Just in it's for you really in that,
you heard me before saying how I've been desensitized
to this, and over time I'll just see it and,
and think, uh, you know, that's just something.
But I noticed that there's been a lot
that's escalated in the last wee while,
whereas the tipping point where we, we, um,
we take everything seriously.
Like the question. I know, but
Yeah, it certainly is.
Um, look, so many different answers spring to my mind.
The, the, the first one is that we like
to hear about things early in our service, which
to be clear focuses on the fixated individuals.
But, you know, frankly, we are gonna have
to review whether we need to approach things differently.
But at that, at this stage, that's what it is.
The earlier, the better. Our focus is on prevention.
Um, so I guess the second answer is when it
distresses you, the problem with that is
that I'm very conscious, but from my work and from work
and related areas around stalking,
that people often aren't aware of the impact on them mm-hmm.
For some time. And, and I've had ludicrous, well,
I think ludicrous referrals where someone says, well,
it's been going on for two years, and I suddenly realized
they haven't been sleeping for that time.
You know, come on. Gosh.
So look at, I,
I just don't think I can properly answer that.
And I'll, I'll probably just talk too much
of if I try to more.
But often I think it's about acknowledging
that this is something that can be a problem, acknowledging
that there's something that can be done about it
and acknowledging that it's impacting on your
feelings and your behaviors.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
You have anything?
Hmm. See, processing?
Um, yeah.
I don't drive a marked car.
I don't wear branding if I'm alone. Mm.
I don't go into
events at night where I'm branded.
I'm happily a no one back venture
that no one really recognizes.
So I can blend in.
Um, but, uh, I've had really,
uh, a fronting situations.
Um, there was a time I was backing out of my house
and someone, someone slammed the, the back, a marked car.
This was during the campaign,
and well, in front of the car,
slammed his fist on the bonnet, walked beside to the,
to my wife's side.
Scary. And so I'm on,
and then she was, he was on my wife's side,
and he was screaming so close to the glass
that the glass was getting his, his his spittle
and my wife.
So my wife's upset.
Um, and then I'm, I'm thinking I should go down
and talk to this guy.
And then, because I, it's, it's mind boggling how someone
would behave like that.
Yeah. Mm. And so,
and then my wife saying, don't, don't go, don't go out.
All of these things. And so we just, we just,
I just kept on backing up and out
and he was like, you know, doing all of that.
Um, but the fact he knows
where you live too, I have moved house. Yeah.
Literally. Um, may I comment? I, I two comments?
So the first one is actually a slightly more
general, uh, comment.
As I said, we are agnostic as
to whether an inquiry is a good idea or not.
Mm-hmm. Um, and there's been discussion
that it should be focused on woman and on ethnicity.
I have no issue with that. But where it occurs,
whether it's male or female mm-hmm.
It's still a problem and it still creates harm as well.
Our research shows there's a gendered effect,
but that's not dismissed to dismiss that it can happen no
to male as well as female, uh, mps public figures.
Second comment I'd make is, um, uh, what, six years
and, well, eight years really.
Well, longer effectiveness work has taught me is that
mps and people in New Zealand greatly value the openness
and the contactability of our public figures.
Mm. And the a down clear downside of
that is it's evident from our work that people
in the community know who you are
and often far too often where you live as well.
And occasionally we'll breach
what I think is a really important dividing line
between public and private as a result of that.
Hey, um, thank you. We might, um, wrap it there just
with an eye on time agenda. Sorry. Do you
Have a comment? I'll just
quick please comment. Comment. Thank you.
I've coming in the end of it,
but I just wanted to say thank you, Sam.
Thank you for, um, this mahi around, you know,
making the world a safe place.
Actually last night we had, um, the second reading
of the stalking and harassment bill Oh, great.
Here in Parliament, which, um, it's amazing
that stalking isn't a criminal offense in New Zealand, but
after we pass this law, it will be.
And I think that, um, that gives, um, parliament another,
um, avenue to go down.
And of course, being the Greens,
we are always about prevention.
So we want some rehabilitation put in there as well.
Um, before becoming an mp, I'm a first term mp.
I was very naive to, uh, some of the security issues,
um, that all of us,
not just people in the public eye should be aware of.
And one of the things that, um, security do here, they look
after us very well, is we have this app
and, um, which sort of yeah.
Keeps us, keeps us safe.
And when I was, um,
in Geneva recently on a, on a, a trip with Parliament, we,
they were looking into, actually,
you might be interested in this, um, research.
They were looking into different, um, parliaments
and different security measures that they take, um,
in different parliaments.
And because of this exact issue, the rise in
really scary stuff happening, particularly for women,
um, parliamentarians.
And then you add on, on top of that things like women
of color and all the, all the rest of it.
Uh, and they actually were really,
really interested in this.
So some of the things that our parliament is doing
to keep us safe, um, may actually be implemented in other,
um, countries around the world.
But, um, yeah. Thank you.
So I just wanted to, to let you know
that we're really appreciate that
and we really appreciate the work that our
security do here as well. Thank you so much.
Yeah, you are welcome. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Sam. Thank you very much.
We, we, we really appreciate all the work
that all of you do as well.
And the last thing I'd say is,
I think New Zealand is better than this.
I think Tel is a better country.
We just have to tap into that, that identity question
of are we better people?
Then? I think we are. That's my, that's my hope.
Yeah. Yeah. Thanks Sam. Sam, thank you very much. Thank,
Thank you so much for your time.